    Smart Report Generator — Interview Question Bank 
Strategy: You handle backend only. For any frontend question, politely say: "The 
frontend was handled by my teammate. I focused entirely on the backend architecture, 
API design, database layer, and the Python intelligence service. " 
 
        1. PROJECT OVERVIEW & ARCHITECTURE (They WILL ask these first) 
 
Q1: Tell me about your project. 
Answer: Smart Report Generator is an AI-powered academic performance reporting 
platform for M S Ramaiah Institute of Technology. It automates the process of collecting 
student academic data — attendance, CIE marks, CGPA, exam history — from the 
college's parent portal using web scraping, normalizes it, stores it in PostgreSQL, and 
generates professional PDF reports with AI-written remarks that are emailed to parents. 
It has three user roles: Students, Proctors (faculty), and Admins. 
 
Q2: Explain your system architecture. 
Answer: We use a distributed three-tier architecture — three independently runnable 
services communicating over HTTP: 
1. Express.js (Port 5001) — the core API gateway. Handles all business logic, 
authentication, session management via Redis, and database operations via 
Prisma ORM on PostgreSQL (Neon cloud). 
2. FastAPI (Port 8000) — the Python intelligence service. Handles web scraping 
with Selenium, data normalization, and AI remark generation using the Groq SDK 
with Llama 3.1. 
3. Frontend — a React SPA (my teammate handled this). 
Express acts as the orchestrator. When a student logs in, Express validates credentials, 
creates a Redis session, and fires a background scrape request to FastAPI. FastAPI 
scrapes the college portal, normalizes the data, and POSTs it back to 
Express's /api/students/sync endpoint, which upserts it into PostgreSQL as a JSONB 
field. 
 
Q3: Why did you choose two separate backend services (Express + FastAPI) instead of 
one? 
Answer: Separation of concerns and performance. Node.js/Express is great for I/O-
bound API orchestration — handling HTTP requests, session management, database 
queries. But Python is the better ecosystem for web scraping (Selenium, 
BeautifulSoup), data processing, and AI/ML integrations (Groq SDK). Running Selenium 
in Node.js would have been clunky. Also, this separation means we can scale them 
independently — the scraping service is CPU-heavy, while Express needs to stay 
lightweight and responsive. 
 
Q4: How do the two backends communicate? 
Answer: Over HTTP using Axios (Express → FastAPI) and requests/httpx (FastAPI → 
Express). 
• Express → FastAPI: When we need to scrape or generate AI remarks — e.g., POST 
/api/scrape or POST /generate-remark. 
• FastAPI → Express: After scraping and normalizing data, 
FastAPI's SyncService POSTs the structured data back to Express's POST 
/api/students/sync endpoint, which upserts it into PostgreSQL. 
The EXPRESS_API_URL is configured via environment variable in FastAPI's .env file. 
 
Q5: Walk me through what happens when a student logs in — end to end. 
Answer: 
1. Student submits USN + Date of Birth. 
2. Express auth.controller calls auth.service.login(). 
3. login() calls userRepository.findByCredentials(usn, dob) — a single Prisma query 
that checks both USN (case-insensitive via .toUpperCase()) and DOB. 
4. If valid, we generate a UUID session ID using crypto.randomUUID(). 
5. We store two Redis 
keys: session:<uuid> → student:<USN> and usn:<USN> → <sessionId>, both with 
a 30-day TTL (2,592,000 seconds). 
6. We fire a background scrape — triggerScrape() is called with .catch() so it's fire-
and-forget. If the scrape fails, the login still succeeds. 
7. We return { usn, sessionId, needsSync } — needsSync is true if the 
student's details JSONB is empty. 
8. When the frontend requests the dashboard, Express checks PostgreSQL first. If 
data exists, it returns it. If not, it triggers a synchronous scrape and waits. 
 
Q6: What is the "fire-and-forget" pattern you used? Why? 
Answer: In auth.service.js, after a successful login, I dynamically 
import report.service.js and call triggerScrape(usn, dob).catch(e => console.error(...)). 
The .catch() means the promise rejection is handled but the login response doesn't wait 
for the scrape to complete. This way, the student gets an instant login response while 
fresh data is being fetched in the background. If the scrape fails (portal is down, etc.), it 
doesn't block the user — they just see cached data from the last successful scrape. 
 
    2. EXPRESS.js BACKEND DEEP DIVE 
 
Q7: Explain your project's folder structure for the Express backend. 
Answer: I follow a layered architecture: 
• routes/ — Route definitions, each file for a domain (auth, report, proctor, admin, 
students, notifications). 
• controllers/ — Request/response handling, input validation, calling the right 
service. 
• services/ — Business logic. auth.service.js handles 
sessions, report.service.js proxies to FastAPI, studentService.js handles 
dashboard reads and JSONB sync, email.service.js handles PDF + email. 
• repositories/ — Data access layer. Prisma queries are isolated here 
(user.repository.js, proctor.repository.js). 
• middlewares/ — session.middleware.js for auth, error.middleware.js for global 
error handling. 
• config/ — db.config.js (Prisma client), redis.config.js (Upstash Redis client). 
 
Q8: Why did you use a Repository pattern? 
Answer: To decouple the service layer from the database implementation. The 
repository layer (user.repository.js, proctor.repository.js) contains all Prisma queries. If 
we ever switch from Prisma to raw SQL or another ORM, only the repository files need to 
change — the services and controllers stay the same. It also makes unit testing easier 
because we can mock the repository without touching the database. 
 
Q9: How does your error handling work? 
Answer: I have a global error handler middleware (error.middleware.js) registered as the 
last app.use() in app.js. Controllers can either return explicit error responses 
(like res.status(404).json(...)) or call next(error) to pass errors to the global handler. I 
also attach custom statusCode properties to errors — for example, in proctorLogin, if 
the password is invalid, I create new Error("Invalid Proctor ID or Password") and 
set err.statusCode = 401 before throwing. 
 
Q10: How do you handle CORS? 
Answer: Simple — app.use(cors()) with default settings, which allows all origins. For 
production, I'd restrict it to the frontend domain using cors({ origin: 'https://myapp.com' 
}). Currently it's wide open because in development, the frontend runs on a different 
port (5173) and needs to talk to Express on port 5001. 
 
Q11: What is Prisma? Why Prisma over raw SQL? 
Answer: Prisma is a type-safe ORM for Node.js. I chose it because: 
1. Schema-as-code — the schema.prisma file defines models declaratively, 
and prisma generate creates the client with full autocompletion. 
2. Migrations — Prisma handles schema migrations cleanly. 
3. JSONB support — Prisma natively supports PostgreSQL's Json type, which was 
critical for storing our scraped data. 
4. Simpler queries — prisma.student.findUnique({ where: { usn } }) is cleaner than 
raw SQL, and it prevents SQL injection by default. 
 
Q12: What npm packages did you use and why? 
Answer: 
• express — Minimal HTTP framework for routing and middleware. 
• prisma — ORM for PostgreSQL. 
• redis (v4) — Node Redis client to connect to Upstash Redis over TLS. 
• bcrypt — Password hashing for proctor accounts (10 salt rounds). 
• cors — CORS middleware. 
• dotenv — Loading environment variables from .env. 
• axios — HTTP client for calling FastAPI. 
• puppeteer — Headless Chrome for server-side PDF generation. 
• resend — Email delivery API. 
• cloudinary — PDF cloud storage/archival. 
• nodemon (dev) — Auto-restart on file changes. 
 
Q13: What does express.json() do? 
Answer: It's a built-in Express middleware that parses incoming request bodies with 
JSON payloads. Without it, req.body would be undefined for POST/PUT requests. It 
replaces the old body-parser package. 
 
           3. FastAPI & PYTHON BACKEND 
 
Q14: Why FastAPI over Flask or Django? 
Answer: Three reasons: 
1. Performance — FastAPI is built on Starlette and uses async/await natively, 
making it one of the fastest Python frameworks. 
2. Automatic validation — Pydantic models validate request bodies automatically 
and generate clean error messages. 
3. Auto-generated docs — FastAPI gives you Swagger UI at /docs out of the box, 
which was great for testing during development. Also, for our use case — a small 
service with 2-3 endpoints — Django would have been overkill. 
 
Q15: Explain the AI remark generation pipeline. 
Answer: It's a three-class pipeline following Single Responsibility: 
1. AIService — The orchestrator. Validates input data (checks that subjects array 
exists and isn't empty), coerces marks/attendance to floats, then calls 
PromptBuilder and LLMProvider. 
2. PromptBuilder — Static method that constructs a structured prompt string from 
the student data. It formats each subject as "- CODE - Name: Marks=X, 
Attendance=Y%" and includes strict instructions: generate exactly 2 lines, no 
subject names, no numeric values, etc. 
3. GroqLLMProvider — Wraps the Groq SDK. 
Calls groq.chat.completions.create() with temperature=0.6 and max_tokens=200
. Returns the text, token count, model name, and generation time in 
milliseconds. 
The response sent back includes student_detail, ai_remark, and meta (model, tokens, 
generation time). 
 
Q16: Why did you choose Groq with Llama 3.1 over OpenAI? 
Answer: Cost and speed. Groq provides free-tier access to Llama 3.1 8B Instant and 
has extremely fast inference (their specialized LPU hardware). For our use case — 
generating a 2-line academic remark — we don't need GPT-4 level intelligence. Llama 
3.1 8B is more than sufficient, and Groq's API gives sub-second responses which keeps 
the user experience snappy. 
 
Q17: What is the temperature parameter in your LLM call? 
Answer: Temperature controls randomness. I set it to 0.6 — a moderate value. Lower 
(like 0.2) would give very deterministic, repetitive outputs. Higher (like 1.0) would be too 
creative and might not follow our strict format. 0.6 gives consistent but slightly varied 
remarks each time, which is appropriate for academic reporting. 
 
Q18: What is Pydantic? How did you use it? 
Answer: Pydantic is a Python library for data validation using type annotations. In 
FastAPI, I used it for: 
1. pydantic-settings — The Settings class in config/settings.py loads and validates 
environment variables (GROQ_API_KEY, GROQ_MODEL, PORT). 
2. request_models.py — Defines Pydantic models for request body validation. 
FastAPI automatically returns 422 errors if the request body doesn't match the 
schema. 
 
          4. DATABASE & DATA LAYER 
 
Q19: Describe your database schema. 
Answer: Four tables in PostgreSQL: 
1. students — PK is usn (String). Has name, dob, phone, email, current_year, and 
critically a details JSONB field that stores the entire normalized academic 
record. 
2. parents — Composite PK on (usn, relation). Stores father, mother contacts. Has 
a foreign key to students.usn. 
3. proctors — PK is proctor_id. Stores name, phone, email, 
and password_hash (bcrypt). 
4. proctor_student_map — Junction table. Auto-incrementing PK, foreign keys 
to proctors and students, plus academic_year. Has a unique constraint 
on (student_id, academic_year) — meaning each student can have only one 
proctor per academic year. 
 
Q20: Why did you use JSONB instead of normalized tables for student academic data? 
Answer: The scraped data is semi-structured and changes semester to semester — 
number of subjects varies, assessment types can differ, attendance detail structure can 
change. Normalizing this into 
separate subjects, assessments, attendance_details tables would create a complex 
join-heavy schema. With JSONB: 
1. Flexible schema — we can store whatever the scraper produces without 
migrations. 
2. Single upsert — syncing data is one prisma.student.upsert() call instead of 
multi-table transactions. 
3. Read performance — dashboard loads are a single query, no JOINs. 
4. PostgreSQL JSONB is indexable — if we needed to query by subject code or 
attendance percentage, we could add GIN indexes. 
The tradeoff is that the JSONB schema is an implicit contract between the Python 
normalizer and the Node.js readers. 
 
Q21: What is an upsert? Where do you use it? 
Answer: Upsert = "INSERT if not exists, otherwise UPDATE. " I use it 
in studentService.syncStudents() — when the FastAPI scraper sends normalized data to 
Express's /api/students/sync, we call prisma.student.upsert({ where: { usn }, update: { 
details: data }, create: { usn, name, details: data, ... } }). This way, if the student already 
exists, we update their details JSONB. If they're new, we create the record. 
 
Q22: Why PostgreSQL? Why not MongoDB? 
Answer: We needed both relational and document features: 
• Relational for structured data: proctors, proctor-student mappings, parents — 
these have clear relationships and foreign keys. 
• Document for semi-structured scraped data — that's where JSONB comes in. 
PostgreSQL gives us both in one database. MongoDB would have handled JSONB 
naturally, but we'd lose relational integrity for proctor-student assignments. Also, we 
use Neon — a serverless PostgreSQL provider — which gives us zero infrastructure 
management. 
 
Q23: What is Neon? Why did you choose it? 
Answer: Neon is a serverless PostgreSQL provider. Benefits: 
• Serverless — scales to zero when not in use, no fixed-cost VM. 
• Free tier — more than sufficient for our project. 
• Compatible — standard PostgreSQL wire protocol, works with Prisma, pgAdmin, 
any PostgreSQL tool. 
• Connection pooling built-in. 
 
Q24: Explain the composite primary key on the parents table. 
Answer: @@id([usn, relation]) — the combination of usn and relation (e.g., "Father" or 
"Mother") is the primary key. This means a student can have multiple parents (one 
record for father, one for mother), but can't have two fathers. It's more natural than an 
auto-increment ID because the uniqueness is inherent in the business domain. 
 
Q25: What is the unique constraint on proctor_student_map? 
Answer: @@unique([student_id, academic_year]) — this ensures a student can only be 
assigned to one proctor per academic year. You can't accidentally assign the same 
student to two proctors in the same year. But a student can have different proctors 
across different years. 
 
     5. AUTHENTICATION & SECURITY 
 
Q26: Explain your authentication mechanism. Why not JWT? 
Answer: I use a Redis-backed session approach: 
• On login, I generate a UUID (crypto.randomUUID()) and store it in Redis 
as session:<uuid> → student:<USN> with a 30-day TTL. 
• The session ID is sent back to the frontend, which includes it in every request 
as x-session-id header. 
• The session.middleware.js validates this header against Redis on every 
protected request. 
Why not JWT? JWTs are stateless — you can't revoke them once issued without 
maintaining a blacklist (which is basically a session store anyway). With Redis sessions, 
I can instantly invalidate a session on logout by just deleting the key. Also, Redis gives 
me a sliding window TTL — I refresh the expiration on every authenticated request, so 
active users never get logged out. 
 
Q27: What is a sliding window session? How did you implement it? 
Answer: Every time the session.middleware.js validates a session, it 
calls redisClient.expire(\session:${sessionId}`, 2592000)` — this resets the TTL back to 
30 days. So as long as the user is active (making API calls), their session never expires. It 
only expires after 30 days of inactivity. This gives a much better UX than fixed-expiration 
tokens. 
 
Q28: How do you handle proctor password security? 
Answer: I use bcrypt with 10 salt rounds. On registration, bcrypt.hash(password, 
10) generates a salted hash stored as password_hash. On 
login, bcrypt.compare(password, proctor.password_hash) verifies without ever 
decrypting. Even if the database is breached, plaintext passwords are unrecoverable. I 
chose 10 rounds as a balance between security and performance — higher rounds 
make brute-force harder but slow down login. 
 
Q29: How does the reverse-index key work in Redis? 
Answer: I maintain two key patterns: 
• session:<uuid> → student:<USN> (for session validation) 
• usn:<USN> → <sessionId> (reverse lookup) 
The reverse index lets me check if a user already has an active session. For proctors, I 
reuse existing sessions instead of creating new ones — if proctor:<ID> already exists in 
Redis, I just refresh its TTL and return the same session ID. On logout, I use the reverse 
index to clean up both keys. 
 
Q30: What security vulnerability exists in your admin routes? 
Answer: (Be honest — they'll respect this) The /api/admin/* routes have no 
authentication. Anyone who discovers the endpoint can create/delete proctors. 
Similarly, /api/auth/proctor-register is public — anyone can register as a proctor. In a 
production deployment, I'd add an admin token middleware or a separate admin 
session type. I'm aware of this gap — it was a time constraint during development. 
 
Q31: How would you secure the admin routes if you had more time? 
Answer: Two options: 
1. Static token — define an ADMIN_SECRET in .env and require it as a header (x-
admin-token) on admin routes. Simple but effective for a single admin. 
2. Role-based sessions — extend the session system. On admin login, 
store session:<uuid> → admin:<ID>. The session middleware already parses role 
from the identity string, so adding an isAdmin check in a new middleware would 
be straightforward. 
 
         6. AI/LLM INTEGRATION 
 
Q32: How do you ensure the AI generates consistent output? 
Answer: Through prompt engineering. The PromptBuilder class creates a very 
structured prompt with 10 specific instructions: 
• "Generate exactly TWO lines only" 
• "Do NOT list subject names" 
• "Do NOT display numeric marks or percentages" 
• Specific format templates for different scenarios (good performance, needs 
improvement, etc.) 
Plus I set temperature=0.6 (moderate randomness) and max_tokens=200 (keeps output 
short). The system message is "You generate professional academic remarks" — this 
grounds the model's role. 
 
Q33: What happens if the Groq API is down? 
Answer: The GroqLLMProvider.generate() method catches exceptions and raises 
a RuntimeError. In report.controller.js, I specifically check 
for ECONNREFUSED and ETIMEDOUT errors and return a 503 Service 
Unavailable response with message "AI Analysis service is currently offline. Please try 
again later. " For other errors, it falls through to the global error handler. The student can 
still see their dashboard data — the AI remark is optional. 
 
Q34: How do you validate the input before sending to the LLM? 
Answer: AIService._validate_input() does several checks: 
1. Must contain a subjects key 
2. subjects must be a list 
3. List cannot be empty 
4. For each subject, it coerces code and name to strings (defaulting to "N/A" and 
"Unknown"), and marks/attendance to floats (defaulting to 0.0 if parsing fails). 
This defensive coercion prevents the LLM from receiving malformed data. 
 
  7. WEB SCRAPING 
 
Q35: Explain how the web scraping works. 
Answer: We use Selenium with headless Chrome to scrape the MSRIT parent portal: 
1. Launch headless Chrome (we tried Brave first but fall back to system Chrome). 
2. Navigate to https://parents.msrit.edu/newparents/. 
3. Fill in the USN field, select DOB dropdowns (day, month, year), and click login. 
4. After login, transfer browser cookies to a requests.Session — this lets us make 
fast HTTP requests instead of using Selenium for every page. 
5. Parse the dashboard HTML to extract course codes and attendance/CIE links. 
6. Concurrently fetch all subject detail pages 
using ThreadPoolExecutor(max_workers=5). 
7. Parse all HTML using BeautifulSoup. 
8. Normalize the raw data into our canonical JSON schema using DataNormalizer. 
9. POST the normalized data back to Express's /api/students/sync. 
 
Q36: Why did you transfer cookies from Selenium to requests? 
Answer: Performance. Selenium is slow because it renders full pages with JavaScript. 
After the initial login (which requires JavaScript for dropdown interactions), we only 
need to fetch HTML pages — no JS needed. By transferring the session cookies to 
Python's requests library, we can make fast HTTP calls. This cut the scraping time 
significantly, especially when fetching 5-8 subject pages concurrently. 
 
Q37: Why ThreadPoolExecutor instead of asyncio? 
Answer: The requests library is synchronous — it doesn't support asyncio. We could 
have used aiohttp for async HTTP calls, but since we already had 
the requests.Session with transferred cookies, 
using ThreadPoolExecutor(max_workers=5) was the pragmatic choice. It gives us true 
parallelism (OS threads, not green threads) for I/O-bound HTTP requests. For 5-8 
concurrent requests, the overhead is negligible. 
 
Q38: What is data normalization? How does your normalizer work? 
Answer: The raw scraped HTML produces messy, inconsistent data. 
The DataNormalizer class converts this into a clean, predictable schema: 
• Assessment names are standardized via regex: "T 1" → "T1" , "A/Q 1" → "AQ1" . 
• CIE marks formula: test_avg = avg(T1, T2) if both > 0, else max(T1, T2). 
Then total_marks = test_avg + AQ1 + AQ2 (capped at 50). 
• Each subject gets a standard structure: { code, name, marks, attendance, 
attendance_details: { present, absent, remaining, percentage, present_dates, 
absent_dates }, assessments: [{ type, obtained_marks, class_average }] }. 
• The output includes usn, name, class_details, cgpa, last_updated, subjects[], 
and exam_history[]. 
 
Q39: What would break if the college portal changes its HTML? 
Answer: Everything in the scraping layer. Since we parse HTML with BeautifulSoup using 
selectors, any change in class names, table structure, or page layout would break the 
parser. This is the most brittle part of the system. Mitigation strategies: 
1. Add robust error handling — catch parsing failures and return partial data 
instead of crashing. 
2. Version the scraper — if the portal updates, we update the parser and bump a 
version. 
3. Monitor for failures — if scrape success rate drops, alert. 
4. Ideally, the college would expose an API, but they don't. 
 
        8. EMAIL & PDF PIPELINE 
 
Q40: Explain the PDF generation and email pipeline. 
Answer: Full pipeline: 
1. Frontend sends HTML content (the rendered report) to POST /api/report/send-
email. 
2. Controller fetches the student + parent records from PostgreSQL. 
3. generatePDFFromHTML() launches Puppeteer (headless Chrome), sets viewport 
to A4 dimensions (794×1123px, 2x scale), injects full CSS + the report HTML, and 
calls page.pdf() with A4 format and 15mm margins. The logo is read from disk, 
converted to base64 Data URI, and injected into the HTML. 
4. The PDF buffer is uploaded to Cloudinary for archival (using stream upload 
with resource_type: "raw"). 
5. For each parent, sendReportEmailViaResend() converts the PDF to base64 and 
sends via Resend API with the PDF as an attachment. The email body is a styled 
HTML template with the student's info and report details. 
 
Q41: Why Puppeteer for PDF generation instead of a library like PDFKit? 
Answer: The report is designed as pixel-perfect A4 HTML/CSS — with tables, grade 
badges, styled headers, signatures. HTML-to-PDF conversion via Puppeteer preserves 
this exact styling because it's using an actual Chrome rendering engine. PDFKit requires 
you to programmatically draw every element. Since the frontend already had the report 
designed in HTML, it made sense to just render that HTML in headless Chrome and 
convert to PDF . 
 
Q42: What is Cloudinary? Why use it? 
Answer: Cloudinary is a cloud media management platform. We upload the generated 
PDFs there for archival — so there's a permanent record of every report sent. We 
use resource_type: "raw" because PDFs aren't images. Each upload gets a unique 
public ID with the format reports/{USN}_{timestamp}. In practice, the Cloudinary env 
vars are not fully configured, so this step would need proper setup for production. 
 
Q43: What is Resend? How does the email delivery work? 
Answer: Resend is a modern email API service (like SendGrid but simpler). We create 
a new Resend(apiKey) client and call resend.emails.send() with: 
• from: configured sender address 
• to: parent's email 
• subject: with student name and USN 
• html: a fully styled HTML email template 
• attachments: the PDF encoded as base64 
Currently we use the sandbox sender (onboarding@resend.dev) which only works for 
verified emails. For production, we'd need a verified custom domain. 
 
           9. REDIS & CACHING 
 
Q44: Why Redis? Why not store sessions in PostgreSQL? 
Answer: Speed. Redis is an in-memory data store — session lookups are O(1) and take 
microseconds. Sessions are checked on every protected API call via middleware. 
PostgreSQL would add ~5-20ms per query. With Redis (Upstash), session checks are 
sub-millisecond. Also, Redis has native TTL (Time-To-Live) support — keys auto-expire 
without any cleanup cron job. 
 
Q45: What is Upstash? Why not self-hosted Redis? 
Answer: Upstash is a serverless Redis provider. Benefits: 
• TLS-secured — connection uses rediss:// (with two 's') protocol. 
• Pay-per-request — no fixed-cost VM. 
• Zero maintenance — no Redis server to manage, patch, or monitor. 
• Free tier — sufficient for development and moderate production use. Self-
hosting Redis would require managing a server, handling persistence, backups, 
and security — not worth it for this project scale. 
 
Q46: What happens if Redis goes down? 
Answer: All authenticated requests would fail with 401 because the session 
middleware can't validate x-session-id against Redis. Login would also fail because we 
can't create new sessions. The system would be in a degraded state — but the database 
data is safe in PostgreSQL. We'd need to reconnect to Redis. Upstash has high 
availability, so this is unlikely, but for critical production, I'd add a Redis connection 
retry logic and perhaps a short-lived in-memory fallback cache. 
 
  10. SYSTEM DESIGN & SCALABILITY 
 
Q47: How would you scale this system for 10,000 students? 
Answer: 
1. Database: PostgreSQL on Neon scales well. Add indexes on frequently queried 
fields. Consider read replicas for dashboard reads. 
2. Redis: Upstash scales automatically. 10K sessions × ~100 bytes each = ~1MB — 
trivial. 
3. Scraping: This is the bottleneck. Rate-limit scraping, use job queues (Bull with 
Redis), process scrapes asynchronously. Run multiple FastAPI instances behind 
a load balancer. 
4. PDF generation: Puppeteer is memory-heavy. Use a dedicated PDF service with 
connection pooling, or switch to a lighter solution like @react-pdf/renderer or a 
cloud PDF API. 
5. Express: Stateless — just add more instances behind a load balancer. Redis 
sessions make this seamless. 
 
Q48: What is the biggest bottleneck in your system? 
Answer: Web scraping. Each scrape launches a headless Chrome instance, logs into 
the college portal, and fetches 5-8 pages. It takes 10-20 seconds per student. This is 
why I made it fire-and-forget on login and added a database-first check on dashboard 
load. If data exists in PostgreSQL, we skip the scrape entirely. 
 
Q49: How do you handle concurrency? What if two users trigger a scrape for the same 
student? 
Answer: Currently, there's no deduplication — both scrapes would run. The second one 
would overwrite the first (since we upsert by USN). For production, I'd add a Redis lock: 
before scraping, check if scraping:<USN> key exists. If yes, skip. If no, set it with a 60-
second TTL and proceed. This prevents redundant scrapes. 
 
Q50: If you had to redesign the communication between Express and FastAPI, what 
would you change? 
Answer: I'd use a message queue like RabbitMQ or Redis-based Bull queue. Instead of 
Express making synchronous HTTP calls to FastAPI, it would publish a scrape job to the 
queue. FastAPI workers would consume jobs at their own pace. This decouples the 
services further, handles retries automatically, and prevents FastAPI from being 
overwhelmed by burst traffic. 
 
    11. KNOWN ISSUES & TRADE-OFFS (Be prepared — good interviewers probe 
weaknesses) 
 
Q51: What are the known issues in your project? 
Answer (Be honest and proactive): 
1. No automated tests — no unit tests, no integration tests. I'd add them with Jest 
(Express) and pytest (FastAPI). 
2. Admin routes are unprotected — no auth middleware on /api/admin/*. 
3. Cloudinary env vars missing — PDF archival won't work without configuration. 
4. Hardcoded academic year "2027" — appears in 5+ places. Should be 
centralized. 
5. Double-nested JSONB — some scraper versions 
produce details.details.subjects, requiring a guard in the controller. Fragile. 
6. Browser path is OS-specific — Brave path is hardcoded for macOS. 
7. mongoose dead dependency — listed in package.json but never used (no 
MongoDB anywhere). 
 
Q52: Why don't you have tests? How would you add them? 
Answer: Time constraint during the semester. If I had more time: 
• Unit tests for normalization_service.py — pure functions with deterministic 
output, easy to test. 
• Unit tests for auth.service.js — mock Redis and Prisma, test 
login/logout/session flows. 
• Integration tests for the scrape → sync → read cycle. 
• E2E tests with Playwright or Cypress for login → dashboard → report flows. 
• I'd use Jest for Express and pytest for FastAPI. 
 
Q53: What does the details.details.subjects double-nesting issue mean? 
Answer: When FastAPI normalizes and syncs data, it sends the entire normalized 
object. Express's studentService.syncStudents() stores this as details: studentData. 
If studentData already has a details key inside it, we get details.details.subjects instead 
of details.subjects. The controller handles both paths with a guard: it 
checks details.subjects, then subjects, then details.details.subjects. It works but it's 
fragile — the real fix would be to flatten the data before storing, or enforce a schema 
contract. 
 
  12. DEPLOYMENT & DevOps 
 
Q54: How do you run all three services locally? 
Answer: I have a start-all.bat script for Windows that launches all three in separate 
terminals. Or manually: 
• Terminal 1: cd backend/fastapi && venv\Scripts\activate && uvicorn main:app --
reload --port 8000 
• Terminal 2: cd backend/express && npm run dev (uses nodemon) 
• Terminal 3: cd frontend && npm run dev (Vite) 
 
Q55: How would you deploy this to production? 
Answer: 
• Express → Railway or Render. Set env vars. Run npx prisma generate && node 
server.js. 
• FastAPI → Render or EC2 (needs Chrome installed for Selenium). Use uvicorn 
main:app --host 0.0.0.0 --port 8000. 
• Frontend → Vercel or Netlify. Set API URLs to production hosts. 
• Database — already on Neon (cloud PostgreSQL). 
• Redis — already on Upstash (cloud Redis). 
• CI/CD — I'd add GitHub Actions for linting, testing, and auto-deploy on push to 
main. 
 
Q56: What environment variables does your system need? 
Answer: Express needs PORT, DATABASE_URL (Neon 
PostgreSQL), REDIS_URL (Upstash 
TLS), FASTAPI_URL, RESEND_API_KEY, RESEND_FROM_EMAIL, and optionally 
Cloudinary credentials. FastAPI needs GROQ_API_KEY, GROQ_MODEL, PORT, 
and EXPRESS_API_URL for syncing back. 
 
   13. GENERAL BACKEND / CS CONCEPTS (They may test fundamentals) 
 
Q57: What is REST? Is your API RESTful? 
Answer: REST (Representational State Transfer) is an architectural style for APIs. Key 
principles: stateless requests, resource-based URLs, use of HTTP methods. My API is 
mostly RESTful — I use proper verbs (GET for reads, POST for creates, DELETE for 
deletes), resource-based paths (/api/proctor/:id/students/:usn), and meaningful status 
codes (200, 400, 401, 404, 500, 502, 503). However, some endpoints like POST 
/api/report/update are more RPC-style than pure REST. 
 
Q58: What is middleware? Give examples from your project. 
Answer: Middleware is a function that runs between receiving a request and sending a 
response. In Express, middleware has access to req, res, and next(). My examples: 
• cors() — handles Cross-Origin Resource Sharing headers. 
• express.json() — parses JSON request bodies. 
• session.middleware.js — validates Redis sessions, attaches user info to req. 
• error.middleware.js — catches errors passed via next(error) and returns 
standardized error responses. 
 
Q59: Explain the difference between async/await and callbacks. 
Answer: Callbacks are the old way — you pass a function to be called when the async 
operation completes. This leads to "callback hell" with deep nesting. async/await is 
syntactic sugar over Promises — it lets you write asynchronous code that looks 
synchronous. I use async/await everywhere: Prisma queries, Redis operations, HTTP 
calls. It makes the code readable and error handling simple with try/catch. 
 
Q60: What is CORS? Why do you need it? 
Answer: CORS (Cross-Origin Resource Sharing) is a browser security mechanism that 
blocks requests from one origin to another unless the server explicitly allows it. Since 
our frontend runs on localhost:5173 and Express on localhost:5001, they're different 
origins. Without cors() middleware, the browser would block all API calls. In production, 
I'd configure it to only allow requests from our frontend domain. 
 
Q61: What is the difference between SQL and NoSQL? 
Answer: SQL databases (PostgreSQL, MySQL) are relational — data in tables with rows 
and columns, strict schemas, support JOINs, ACID transactions. NoSQL databases 
(MongoDB, Redis) are non-relational — flexible schemas, optimized for specific access 
patterns. I use both: PostgreSQL for structured relational data (students, proctors, 
mappings), plus its JSONB feature for document-style storage, and Redis for key-value 
session caching. 
 
Q62: What is an ORM? 
Answer: Object-Relational Mapping — it maps database tables to programming 
language objects. Instead of writing raw SQL like SELECT * FROM students WHERE usn 
= ?, I write prisma.student.findUnique({ where: { usn } }). Prisma is the ORM I use. 
Benefits: type safety, SQL injection prevention, easier migrations, cleaner code. 
Downside: can be less performant than hand-tuned SQL for complex queries. 
 
Q63: What are HTTP status codes you've used? 
Answer: 
• 200 — Success 
• 400 — Bad Request (missing USN, missing HTML content) 
• 401 — Unauthorized (invalid/expired session) 
• 404 — Not Found (student or proctor doesn't exist) 
• 409 — Conflict (proctor already exists during registration) 
• 500 — Internal Server Error 
• 502 — Bad Gateway (scraper failed to reach college portal) 
• 503 — Service Unavailable (FastAPI/AI service is down) 
 
       14. BEHAVIORAL / DECISION QUESTIONS 
 
Q64: What was the most challenging part of this project? 
Answer: The scraping pipeline. The college portal wasn't designed for automation — it 
uses dynamic dropdowns for DOB, session-based auth, and inconsistent HTML across 
pages. Getting Selenium to reliably fill the login form, then transferring cookies 
to requests for concurrent fetching, and finally normalizing the messy HTML into a clean 
schema was the most complex piece. I had to handle edge cases like missing subjects, 
zero-valued assessments, and inconsistent test naming. 
 
Q65: If you could redo one architectural decision, what would it be? 
Answer: The JSONB storage pattern. While flexible, it creates a fragile implicit contract 
between Python and Node. I'd define a formal JSON Schema (or a shared Pydantic 
model + Zod schema) that both sides validate against. This would catch data 
mismatches at sync time rather than at read time. 
 
Q66: How do you handle errors gracefully in your API? 
Answer: Multiple layers: 
1. Input validation at the controller level — check for required fields, return 400. 
2. Service-level try/catch — catch specific errors (ECONNREFUSED → 503, wrong 
credentials → 401). 
3. Global error handler — error.middleware.js catches anything that slips through, 
logs it, and returns a standardized error response. 
4. Non-breaking fallbacks — the notification controller always returns { success: 
true, data: [] } even on internal errors, so the UI doesn't crash. 
 
Q67: How did you ensure data consistency between the two backends? 
Answer: Express is the single source of truth — all persistent data lives in PostgreSQL. 
FastAPI is stateless — it scrapes, normalizes, and pushes data to Express. If FastAPI 
crashes mid-scrape, no data is corrupted because the old data in PostgreSQL is 
untouched (the upsert hasn't happened yet). The sync endpoint is idempotent — calling 
it multiple times with the same data produces the same result. 
 
   15. FRONTEND QUESTIONS (Your "I don't know" answers) 
 
Q68: How does the React frontend work? 
Say: "The frontend was handled by my teammate. I focused on the backend — APIs, 
database, session management, and the Python service. I can tell you about the API 
contracts the frontend consumes, but not the React implementation details. " 
 
Q69: How does the frontend talk to the backend? 
Say: "I know the contract — the frontend uses Axios to make HTTP requests to Express 
on port 5001 with an x-session-id header for authentication. The API responses are 
standardized JSON with success, data, and message fields. But the frontend code itself 
was my teammate's responsibility. " 
 
Q70: What is Vite/Tailwind/React Router? 
Say: "I know they're part of the frontend stack — Vite is the build tool, Tailwind for CSS, 
React Router for navigation. But I didn't work with them directly. My focus was the 
Express and FastAPI backends. " 
 
      16. BONUS — "DO YOU HAVE QUESTIONS?" (Ask the interviewer) 
These show depth: 
1. "What does your backend architecture look like? Monolith or microservices?" 
2. "How do you handle database migrations in production?" 
3. "What's your testing strategy — do you focus more on unit tests or integration 
tests?" 
4. "How do you manage secrets and environment variables in your deployment 
pipeline?" 
 
          QUICK REVISION CHEAT SHEET 
Topic Key Fact to Remember 
Architecture 3-tier: Express (API) + FastAPI (AI/Scraping) + React (Frontend) 
Database PostgreSQL (Neon), JSONB for academic data 
Topic Key Fact to Remember 
Auth Redis sessions, UUID, 30-day TTL, sliding window, x-session-id header 
Password bcrypt, 10 salt rounds 
Scraping Selenium → cookies → requests + ThreadPoolExecutor → BeautifulSoup → 
normalize → sync 
AI Groq SDK, Llama 3.1 8B Instant, temp=0.6, max_tokens=200 
PDF Puppeteer → A4 → base64 logo injection → buffer 
Email Resend API, PDF as base64 attachment 
ORM Prisma 
Session Store Redis (Upstash, TLS) 
Key 
Weakness No tests, no admin auth, hardcoded academicYear 
 